# MATLAB Numerical Methods
All files in this repository are MATLAB .m files. Each file is in the form of a MATLAB function, which can be called by any file or the command line, so long as the function file is in the working directory. 

All functions are original and written to meet certain criteria. MATLAB has built-in functions for each of the files in this reposistory, which are optimized and will run faster. However, the functions provided here sallow for the inner workings and theory behind these numerical methods to be understood. Future algorithms may rely in part on any one of these files to generate a more in-depth and advanced method. 

The details of every function are given at the beginning of each .m file. This information will also return in the MATlab command window when prompted by:

help "function_name"
  
In the same working directory. 
  
Each function also contains comments, for better understanding. 

# Current Algorithms

1.) LU Decomposition/Factorization
2.) False Position Rootfinding
3.) Simpson's 1/3 Rule Integration

## LU Decomposition/Factorization

luFactor Returns L and U factor matrices and pivot matrix P, given matrix A, 
   Inputs:
   A

   Outputs:
   L
   U
   P
   
   A is a square matrix populated by numbers. Only one input is allowed.
   
   L is the lower triangular matrix of dimensions A
   U is the upper triangular matrix of dimensions A
   P is the pivot matrix of dimensions A

## False Position Rootfinding

falsePosition Calculates the root of a function given two brackets.
   Inputs:
   Function (Use a function handle)
   Lower bracket
   Upper bracket
   Desired % relative error
   Max number of iterations

   Outputs: 
   root
   Function value at root
   Approximate % relative error
   Number of iterations

## Simpson's 1/3 Rule Integration

Simpson applies the Simpson's 1/3 Rule to integrate y over x. 
 Inputs:
 x:     x must be an equally spaced array, covering the interval of integration
 y:     y must be an array containing function values corresponding to x

 Outputs:
 I:     Resulting estimate of the integral

 Notes and Warnings:

 Simpson evaluates the integral using Simpson's 1/3 Rule for intervals of
 x which contain an even number of bins. That is, the number of elements
 in x is odd. 

 If the number of bins is odd (number of elements in x is even), then the
 last bin will be calculated using a single iteration of the trapezoidal
 rule. This will increase the resulting error. A warning will be displayed
 in the command console. 

 The x vector is checked for linearity to 13 decimal points, so Simpson
 may erroneously accept a non-linearly spaced x vector, if the difference 
 between consecutive distances between elements differs by less than 
 0.0000000000001. This accounts for subtractive cancellation errors, and
 spacing generated by linspace() which may be accurate to 14 decimal
 places, with the 15th place holding error. This truncation in linearity
 checking may affect the result of Simpson, with larger errors occurring
 for larger resulting integrals. It is recommended to generate x using
 linspace(), or ensure that tabulated data is spaced correctly. 
